# function words across narrative time - the weird difference between "a" and "the"

- [a, an, the]
- circle back to the plot of frequency vs bin count variance
- [log-log, ratio coloring]
- not just that almost all of the words sit above the expected baseline - clear that the slope of the data is actually higher than this, that words actually before more non-uniform as they before more frequent, even when comparing to the expected rise in variance along with frequency
- indeed, when you score the words by dividing the observed variance by the expected - the number of times greater the observed is than the expected - the most frequent words score as the most non-uniform of everything in the dictionary, and by a fairly wide margin. here are the top 100 words, ranked by this ratio between observed / expected variance:
- [top 100]
- this set of the top 100 contains XX of the most frequent words in the dictionary; and, if you skim off the top XX words, you get all of the 100 most frequent words in the corpus.
- what to make of this? it's is kind of bizarre, in a sense, and not what I expected going in - I assumed that function words would be (almost) totally flat, since I don't think of them as having any kind of semantic "focus" that would cause them to attach to any particular region across the narrative interval.
- usually, when something correlates with frequency like this, it feels like a rag flag, the worry being that you're somehow just reproducing the fact that frequent words are frequent, infrequent words are infrequent.
- as a sanity check, I re-ran the exact same feature extraction job on the corpus, but this time, for each text, before adding up the bin counts, I just randomly shuffled the words in the text, to destroy any kind of narratological ordering. and sure enough with this, the variances clamp right onto the expected line:
- [log-log, shuffled]
- so, I think there is actually some meaningful way in which high frequency words are actually the most non-uniform across narrative time? but, I'm not really sure how to interpret this. am I wrong to be surprised by this? is it somehow tautologically true, is there some kind of statistical / lingustic / narratological truism that would make it impossible for this not to be the case, in some sense?
- part of the reason this feels counterintuitive, I think, is that this question of what it means for a word to be narratologically "non-uniform" or "surprising" is actually less cut-and-dry than it first seemed to me, and interacts in interesting ways with the overall frequency of the word.
- for example, take the word "a," which is the Nth most frequent word in English and appears XX times in the corpus, and "gun," which appears XX times:
- [a, gun histograms]
- which of these is more "surprising"? if you think of them in terms of probability distributions, "gun" obviously has the much more dramatic trend - a huge spike around the X% marker, the moment of crime / climax, where it literally doubles in volume relative to the baseline across the first half of the narrative. indeed, if you treat them as density functions - throwing out information about the overall frequencies - and then compare them to the expected uniform distribution using pretty much any measure of statistical distance (euclidean, wasserstein, bray-curtis), "gun" will always score as much more "non-uniform" by a large margin. just using the euclidean distance, the metric I used before for the hierarchical cluster - "gun" has a distance of XX from the uniform, "a" of YY.
- [a, gun, relativized series]
- meanwhile "a," as a density function, is much "flatter." but, when you remember the actual footprint of the word in the corpus - "a" appears XX times in the corpus, which represents about 2% of all words in all 27k novels - the total quantity of linguistic "mass" that's getting displaced here is sort of fascinating and bizarre. in the first percentile, "a" appears XX times more than you'd expect, and XX fewer times than you'd expect in the last percentile. here again, plotted with an error bar around the expected uniform distribution - if the frequency of "a" had no relationship with narrative location, the bin counts would fall inside the gray band within 2 standard deviations:
- [a]
- "a" is flatter, but, since it's so frequent, it represents a kind of massive, tectonic displacement of words, sort of like the gravity of the moon pulling the tide in and out - the water only rises and falls a couple of feet, but in order for that to happen the entire mass of the ocean has to get moved around. the amount of narratological energy needed to produce the "a" trend seems much larger than for "gun."

- so, what to make of "a"? high at the very beginning, a fast falloff, declining more slowly across the middle, then falling off quickly again at the very end. "an" is almost identical, with more noise in the sample, since it's less frequent:
- [an]
- there's a pretty easy explanation for this, though I'm kind of fascinated by the fact that it (seems to) show up at the scale of entire narrative, and not just inside of individual passages - "a" is used when a noun is introduced for the first time, when an object makes its first appearance in some context. eg, you might say - "a man was walking down the street" - but then, after that, you'd switch to the definite article - "the man walked into a shop," etc. as franco pointed out to me, benveniste makes exactly this point in problems in general linguistics:
- [benveniste]
- so, with the caveat that this drifts considerably into speculation - maybe one way to think of this is to say that "a" is a kind of proxy for the *rate at which newness is introduced into the text*? at the beginning, this is very high, as the fictive world is painted into existence, people and places are introduced, the pieces of the narrative are put into place. it then falls off rapidly after the beginning once the stage is set and the plot starts to spool out, as the fictive matter introduced at the beginning shifts into the register of the definite "the." then, over the course of the middle, the plot continues to move into new fictional space - new people, new places, new objects - but more slowly than at the beginning, which had to bootstrap the entire world into existence from the ground up. and finally, at the end, this rate of movement falls off quickly around the 95% mark - as if the text arrives at its ending point a bit early and stays there for a beat. "a," in other words, gives an empirical signals for the "speed" of the novel, in one sense of the idea - the degree to which it is moving into new fictive contexts that have to be introduced for the first time, as opposed to standing still inside of contexts that have already been blocked in by the preceeding narrative. (sort of like those old RPGs from the late 90's, like Baldur's Gate or Icewind Dale, where by default the entire world of the game is black; and things only come into view as your character moves around the map, as the spotlight of the game falls onto new territory for the first time - the moment of "a" - and when you track back to places you've already been - the switch to "the.")
- is this the right explanation? it seems sensible, but I'm just kind of telling stories about the graphs. the funny thing, though, is that I'm not actually sure how you'd "prove" this, either at a linguistic or a literary register - it seems like the obvious next step would be to dip back down into individual texts and start spot-checking passages, but with a word like "a," which will appear literally millions of times and in virtually all contexts - this seems sort of like a losing game. I guess the next thing to do would be to look at words that follow "a" - maybe, constrain it to nouns - find words that most distinctively follow "a" in different regions of the narrative, and see if some kind of pattern falls out? eg, what words come after "a" most distinctively in the first percentile, as compared to the last percentile?
- even if it's true, though, that "a" is marking the rate of fictional world-building in the narrative - it's also not clear to me what really to make of that. does it make sense to think of this as just a lower-level version of the types of constraints enforced by, say, the kinds of narratological cycles / unities / genre constraints that pushed "death" and "marriage" to the end, "youth" and "college" to the beginning? or does that overestimate the importance of literary convention, as this level - is there some sense in which this trend is *inevitable*, that it must be the case, that it would be nearly impossible to write a narrative that doesn't show this pattern? in terms of "a" - is a novel like a ball placed at the top of a steep, smooth incline, where it would take some kind of huge structural exertion not to roll down the slope, not to show this symmetrical falloff in the frequency of the word? (which raises the tantalizing queston - are there texts that invert this, that flip the sign on the slope, where "a" increases across the text - texts that roll uphill?) or - is this distinctive of narrative, or is it true of all long prose documents? if we looked at 30k academic monographs - would we see the same thing?
- what about "the," the grammaticaly complement to "a"? if it's true that "a" is high at the beginning because it marks the introduction of new things, we might expect "the" to do the opposite, the be the vertical mirror image of "a" - low at the beginning, and then progressively higher across the text as things become increasingly "known" to the narrative. in fact, though, "the" looks like this:
- [the]
- also very high at the very beginning, a fast falloff in the first 10%, comparatively low through the middle, and then a smaller but still very significant uptick at the very end. so "a" and "the" - flip sides of the same coin, grammatically speaking - seem to do different work at a narratological level. both seem to mark beginnings and ends, but in different ways. "a" shows something about how they are different - the beginning is a deluge of newness, as the fictional world is introduced, and the end is slow / stationary, in the sense that the narrative has stopped breaking trail into fresh fictive contexts? but "the" is high at both beginning and the end, and so then I guess shows something about how they are similar, a way in which the end is some kind of return to the beginning?
- but in what sense? it reminds me of those clusters from the last post that were high at both the beginning and the end - the "outdoors" and "location" words, and to a lesser extent the "description" words, clearly modifying people and things. maybe - "the" is marking some kind of "concreteness" or "physicality" in the narrative register, a focus on the material surface of the fictive world? this makes sense at the beginning, where the text has to hammer together the "stage" of the narrative - the city, the house, the room, the table, the street, the train, the physical tableau on / in which the plot plays out?
- and the end? I guess there's some intuitive sense in which the end returns to this "surface," though it's harder to put a finger on this. maybe one way to think about it is just to say that things happen at the end - pistols are fixed, people are killed, lovers are reunited, the bride walks down the aisle, etc. the action of the narrative crescendos, the pieces of the plot are moved into their final positions - robert jordan blows the bridge, Ralph dies and Isabel goes back to England, only then to return to Osmond in Italy; Lucy and George marry and go back to Florence. we could imagine, if a novel is turned into a screenplay, that the beginnings and ends have the most "description" in the text of the script, the prose narration that the screenwriter threads in between the lines, the rough sketch of what would appera on screen but not in the dialogue - the layout of the set, the physical locations of props, the movements of the characters, the broad strokes of the photography. beginnings and ends are preoccupies with narrative stagecraft, I guess, which pulls the narrative out into a register of description, physicality, specificity, concreteness, *particularity* - the domain of "the"?
- TODO: JD's person
- but I'm not sure - again, to really get a handle on this, we'd need to go in an look at the words that most frequently / distinctively come after the in different regions of the narrative, which I'll try to do in the next couple weeks.
- in the meantime, though - beyond a / an / the, what about other determiners?
- [all determiners]
- breaking this down, with this / that / these / those:
- [this that these those]
- so, basically, at a narratological level, they pair up on the basis of singular / plural, not near / far. this / that are low at the beginning, peak around 70%, and then fall off at the end:
- [this that]
- whereas these / those are very high at the start, flat across the middle, and then split at the end, with "those" going up and "these" falling off:
- [these those]
- i had no idea about this, but then JD pointed out that "this" and "that" look a lot like the "dialogue" clusters from before, particularly the dialogue / mental states cohort:
- [dialogue / mental states]
- and, JD also pointed out that both "this" and "that" are most frequent in the "spoken" sub-corpus of COCA. so,   maybe this is driven by dialogue? interesting and sort of weird, though, that when characters talk about things, they would tend to talk about individual things (this morning, that person), and not multiple things?
- as for "these" and "those" - I'm not sure why plurals would be so high at the beginning, though it seems to match up with other signals. eg, if we compare the overall distributions for singular versus plural nouns:
- [NN, NNS]
- the plurals are significantly higher at the start, so I guess it makes sense sense that you'd need more these's and those's. (though, this just begs the question - why are plural nouns higher at the start?) the divergence at the end is also interesting - why does those spike up, and these fall off?
- again, this is all very just-so for the time being, but this kind of fits with the idea from the last post with the geography words that the ending is a kind of "zooming out," if think of the narrative as a kind of camera onto the fictional world - at the end of the text the narrative pans out into a wide shot of the surrounding mountains / fields / valleys, it makes itself *distant* from the actual action of the plot - the domain of "those," instead of "these"?
- to round things out with the determiners:
- [all / some / no]
- all peaks at the end, the place of generalization, completeness, closure? less sure what to make of the fact that "some" peaks at 20%, "no" at 80%. (no used specifically as a determiner here, in the sense of "there were no people in the room."):
- [some no]
- and, why does "each" skyrocket at 99%, but "every" stays low?
- [each every]

- anyway,  this is really just the tip of the iceberg - almost all high frequency words have strong trends across the narrative. the 30 most frequent words in English:
- [30 most frequent]
- in particular - in the next few days I'll circle back to conjunctions, pronouns, and the different tenses of the verb "to be," all of which are sort of bizarre.